---
layout: book
title: "Quick Start"
subsite: "Dart Up and Running"
description: "Read Chapter 1, Quick Start (from Dart: Up and Running, published by O'Reilly)."
prev-chapter: preface.html
prev-chapter-title: "Preface"
next-chapter: ch02.html
next-chapter-title: "Language Tour"
---

{% include toc.html %}
{% include book-nav.html %}

# {{ page.title }}

Welcome to Dart, an open-source, batteries-included developer platform
for building structured HTML5 web apps. This chapter tells you why
Google created Dart, what’s cool about Dart, and how to write and run
your first Dart app.

Dart provides not only a new language, but libraries, an editor, a
virtual machine (VM), a browser that can run Dart apps natively, and a
compiler to JavaScript. Dart aims to be a more productive way to build
the high-performance, modern apps that users demand.

## Why Google created Dart {#why-google-created-dart}

Google cares a lot about helping to make the web great. We write a lot
of web apps, many of them quite sophisticated—think Gmail, Google
Calendar, Google+, and more. We want web apps to load quickly, run
smoothly, and present engaging and fun experiences to users. We want
developers of all backgrounds to be able to build great experiences for
the browser.

As an example of Google’s commitment to the web, consider the Google
Chrome browser. Google created it to spur competition at a time when the
web platform seemed to be stagnating. It worked.
As the following figure shows, browser
speed has increased immensely since Chrome’s introduction in 2008.

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
The JavaScript engine known as _V8_ is responsible for much of Chrome’s
speed. Many of the V8 engineers are now working on the Dart project.
</aside>

![Browser speed (V8 benchmark suite v7; higher numbers are
better)](images/daur_0101.png)

The number of new features in browsers has also increased, with APIs
such as WebGL, FileSystem, Web workers, and WebSockets. Browsers now
have automatic update capabilities, frequently delivering new features
and fixes directly to the user. Mobile devices such as tablets and
phones also have modern browsers with many HTML5 features.

Despite these improvements in the web platform, the developer experience
hasn’t improved as much as we’d like. We believe it should be easier to
build larger, more complex web apps. It’s taken far too long for
productive tools to emerge, and they still don’t match the capabilities
offered by other developer platforms. You shouldn’t have to be
intimately familiar with web programming to start building great apps
for the modern web. And even though JavaScript engines are getting
faster, web apps still start up much too slowly.

We expect Dart to help in two main ways:

-   *Better performance:* As VM engineers, the designers of Dart know
    how to build a language for performance. A more structured language
    is easier to optimize, and a fresh VM enables improvements such as
    faster startup.

-   *Better productivity:* Support for libraries and packages helps you
    work with other developers and easily reuse code from other
    projects. Types can make APIs clearer and easier to use. Tools help
    you refactor, navigate, and debug code.


## A quick look at the Dart language {#a-quick-look-at-the-dart-language}

It’s hard to talk about a language without seeing it. Here’s a peek at a
small Dart program:

<!-- ch01/simple_point.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
import 'dart:math';

class Point {
  num x, y;
  Point(this.x, this.y);
  num distanceTo(Point other) {
    var dx = x - other.x;
    var dy = y - other.y;
    return sqrt(dx * dx + dy * dy);
  }
}

main() {
  var p = new Point(2, 3);
  var q = new Point(3, 4);
  print('distance from p to q = ${p.distanceTo(q)}');
}
{% endprettify %}

Of course, Dart’s main use case is building modern web apps. Programming
the browser is easy:

<!-- ch01/web_app/web/web_app.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
import 'dart:html';

main() {
  var button = new ButtonElement();
  button
    ..id = 'confirm'
    ..text = 'Confirm'
    ..classes.add('important')
    ..onClick.listen((e) => window.alert('Confirmed!'));
  querySelector('#registration').children.add(button);
}
{% endprettify %}

You’ll learn about the Dart language and libraries in Chapters 2 and 3.


## What’s cool about Dart {#whats-cool-about-dart}

Dart may look familiar, but don’t let that fool you. Dart has lots of
cool features to help give you a productive and fun experience building
the next generation of awesome web apps.

*Dart is easy to learn.* A wide range of developers can learn Dart
quickly. It’s an object-oriented language with classes, single
inheritance, lexical scope, top-level functions, and a familiar syntax.
Most developers are up and running with Dart in just a few hours.

*Dart compiles to JavaScript.* Dart has been designed from the start to
compile to JavaScript, so that Dart apps can run across the entire
modern web. Every feature considered for the language must somehow be
translated to performant and logical JavaScript before it is added. Dart
draws a line in the sand and doesn’t support older, legacy browsers.

*Dart runs in the client and on the server.* The Dart virtual machine
(VM) can be integrated into a web browser, but it can also run
standalone on the command line. With built-in library support for files,
directories, sockets, and even web servers, you can use Dart for full
end-to-end apps.

*Dart has great tools.* The Dart SDK has all the command-line tools you
need to write, launch, and debug Dart apps, including the Dart analyzer
and the pub package manager. Dart plugins for external
tools—such as WebStorm, IntelliJ IDEA, and Sublime Text—allow them to
support features such as Dart code completion, detecting potential bugs,
debugging, and refactoring.

*Dart supports types, without requiring them.* You can omit types when
you want to move very quickly, aren’t sure what structure to take, or
simply want to express something you can’t with the type system. You can
add types as your program matures, the structure becomes more evident,
and more developers join the project. Dart’s optional types are static
type annotations that act as documentation, clearly expressing your
intent. Using types means that fewer comments are required to document
the code, and tools can give better warnings and error messages.

*Dart scales from small scripts to large, complex apps.* Web development
is very much an iterative process. With the reload button acting as your
compiler, building the seed of a web app is often a fun experience of
writing a few functions just to experiment. As the idea grows, you can
add more code and structure. Thanks to Dart’s support for top-level
functions, optional types, classes, and libraries, your Dart programs
can start small and grow over time. Dart plugins to IDEs help you
refactor and navigate your code as it evolves.

*Dart has a wide array of built-in libraries.* The core library supports
built-in types and other fundamental features such as collections,
dates, and regular expressions. Web apps can use the HTML library—think
DOM programming, but optimized for Dart. Command-line apps can use the
I/O library to work with files, directories, sockets, and servers. Other
libraries include URI, UTF, Crypto, Math, and Unit test.

*Dart supports safe, simple concurrency with isolates.* Traditional
shared-memory threads are difficult to debug and can lead to deadlocks.
Dart’s isolates, inspired by Erlang, provide an easier to understand
model for running isolated, but concurrent, portions of your code.
Spawning new isolates is cheap and fast, and no state is shared.

*Dart supports code sharing.* Traditional web programming workflows
can’t integrate third-party libraries from arbitrary sources or
frameworks. With the Dart package manager (pub) and language features
such as libraries, you can easily discover, install, and integrate code
from across the web and enterprise.

*Dart is open source.* Dart was born for the web, and it’s available
under a BSD-style license. You can find the project’s [issue tracker and
source repository](https://github.com/dart-lang/sdk) online. Maybe you’ll
submit the next patch?


## Up and running {#up-and-running}

Now that you know something about Dart, get ready to code! These
instructions feature the open-source DartPad tool,
which runs in any modern browser.


### Step 1: Open DartPad, and run some samples {#step-1-open-and-run}

<ol markdown="1">
  <li markdown="1">
  Go to <a href="{{site.custom.dartpad.direct-link}}" target="_blank">dartpad.dartlang.org</a>.

  A sample appears on the left, with its output on the right.
  If you've played with DartPad before,
  you can click **New Pad** to get back to the original sample.

  <aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
  **What about mobile?**
  DartPad has a slightly different user interface on mobile devices.
  To run an app, click the red button, which takes you to the output.
  </aside>
  </li>

  <li markdown="1">
  Click **Run**.

  The sample runs again, updating the output.
  </li>

  <li markdown="1">
  Choose an HTML sample, using the **Samples** list at the upper right.

  For example, choose **Hello World HTML**.
  Again, the output appears to the right.
  By default, you see the HTML output—what you'd see in a browser.
  </li>

  <li markdown="1">
  Click **CONSOLE** to view the sample's console output.
  </li>

  <li markdown="1">
  Click the **HTML** tab to view the sample's HTML markup.
  </li>
</ol>

### Step 2: Create a command-line app {#step-2-server}

To create a simple command-line app, use **New Pad**.

<ol markdown="1">
  <li markdown="1">
  Click the **New Pad** button.

  The source code for the Hello World app appears
  under the DART tab.
  </li>

  <li markdown="1">
  Change the code. For example, change the `main()` function
  to contain this code:

<!-- ch03/string-tests.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
for (var char in 'hello'.split('')) {
  print(char);
}
{% endprettify %}

  As you type, DartPad shows hints, documentation,
  and autocomplete suggestions.
  </li>

  <li markdown="1">
  Run your app.
  </li>

  <li markdown="1">
  If you didn't happen to have any bugs while you were entering the code,
  try introducing a bug.

  For example, if you change `split` to `spit`,
  you get warnings at the bottom of the window and in the Run button.
  If you run the app, you'll see output from an uncaught exception.
  </li>

  <li markdown="1">
  Save your app by clicking **Share**.

  DartPad gives you links to the app,
  both in DartPad and in gist.github.com.
</li>
</ol>


### Step 3: Create a web app {#step-3-web}

To create a simple web app, start with the Hello World HTML sample.

<ol>
  <li>
    Click <b>Sample</b>, and choose <b>Hello World HTML</b>.
    If you've already edited Hello World HTML,
    click <b>Reset</b> to restore the original version.
  </li>

  <li>
    Edit the HTML:
    <ol>
      <li>
        Click <b>HTML</b> to view the HTML code.
      </li>
      <li>
        Change the text inside the h2 element
        from <code>Hello world</code> to something else—perhaps
        <b>Hola mundo</b>.
      </li>
    </ol>
    <p>
      The display under HTML OUTPUT updates as you type.
    </p>
  </li>

  <li>
    Edit the Dart code:
    <ol>
      <li>
        Click <b>DART</b> to view the Dart code.
      </li>
      <li>
        Change the value displayed by <code>count.text</code>.
        For example, change <code>'${i}'</code> to <code>'#${i}'</code>.
      </li>
      <li>
        Click <b>Run</b> to compile and run the Dart code,
        updating the HTML OUTPUT display.
      </li>
    </ol>
  </li>
</ol>


## What next? {#what-next}

Now that you know the basics, you can learn more about Dart.

### Follow a code lab {#follow-a-code-lab}
{:.no_toc}

Go to [dartlang.org/codelabs](/codelabs/) to
find step-by-step instructions for writing apps. The
[first code lab](/codelabs/darrrt/) guides
you through using DartPad to build and run a pirate name badge
generator.

### Download Dart {#download-dart}
{:.no_toc}

Go to [dartlang.org/downloads](/downloads/) to
download the Dart SDK.
Try it with your favorite IDE or editor.
[WebStorm](/tools/webstorm/) comes with the Dart plugin,
or you can [install a Dart plugin](/tools/) into another IDE or editor.

### Read tutorials {#read-tutorials}
{:.no_toc}

[The Dart Tutorials](/docs/tutorials/) teach you
how to build web applications using the Dart language, tools, and APIs.

### Join the community {#join-community}
{:.no_toc}

Visit [dartlang.org/support](/support/) to find mailing lists
and other ways to get help and learn more about Dart.


<hr>
{% include book-nav.html %}
