---
layout: book
title: "A Tour of the Dart Language"
subsite: "Dart Up and Running"
description: "Read Chapter 2, A Tour of the Dart Language of Dart (from Dart: Up and Running, published by O'Reilly)."
prev-chapter: ch01.html
prev-chapter-title: "Quick Start"
next-chapter: ch03.html
next-chapter-title: "Library Tour"
---

{% include toc.html %}
{% include book-nav.html %}

# {{ page.title }}

This chapter shows you how to use each major Dart feature, from
variables and operators to classes and libraries, with the assumption
that you already know how to program in another language.

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
To play with each feature, create a command-line application project
in Dart Editor, as described in
[Up and running](ch01.html#up-and-running).
</aside>

Consult the [Dart Language
Specification](/docs/spec/) whenever you want
more details about a language feature.


## A basic Dart program {#a-basic-dart-program}

The following code uses many of Dart’s most basic features:

<!-- ch02/basic_dart_program.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
// Define a function.
printNumber(num aNumber) {
  print('The number is $aNumber.'); // Print to console.
}

// This is where the app starts executing.
main() {
  var number = 42; // Declare and initialize a variable.
  printNumber(number); // Call a function.
}
{% endprettify %}

Here’s what this program uses that applies to all (or almost all) Dart
apps:

<code>// <em>This is a comment.</em> </code>

:   Use // to indicate that the rest of the line is a comment.
    Alternatively, use /\* ... \*/. For details, see
    [Comments](#comments).

`num`

:   A type. Some of the other built-in types are String, int, and bool.

`42`

:   A number literal. Literals are a kind of compile-time constant.

`print()`

:   A handy way to display output.

`'...'` (or `"..."`)

:   A string literal.

<code>$<em>variableName</em></code> (or <code>${<em>expression</em>}</code>)

:   String interpolation: including a variable or expression’s string
    equivalent inside of a string literal. For more information, see
    [Strings](#strings).

`main()`

:   The special, *required*, top-level function where app execution
    starts. For more information, see
    [The main() function](#the-main-function).

`var`

:   A way to declare a variable without specifying its type.

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
Our code follows the conventions in the [Dart Style
Guide.](/articles/style-guide/) For example, we
use two-space indentation.
</aside>


## Important concepts {#important-concepts}

As you learn about the Dart language, keep these facts and concepts in
mind:

-   Everything you can place in a variable is an *object*, and every
    object is an instance of a *class*. Even numbers, functions, and
    `null` are objects. All objects inherit from the
    [Object](http://api.dartlang.org/dart_core/Object.html) class.

-   Specifying static types (such as `num` in the preceding example)
    clarifies your intent and enables static checking by tools, but it’s
    optional. (You might notice when you’re debugging your code that
    variables with no specified type get a special type: `dynamic`.)

-   Dart parses all your code before running it. You can provide tips to
    Dart—for example, by using types or compile-time constants—to catch
    errors or help your code run faster.

-   Dart supports top-level functions (such as `main()`), as well as
    functions tied to a class or object (*static* and *instance
    methods*, respectively). You can also create functions within
    functions (*nested* or *local functions*).

-   Similarly, Dart supports top-level *variables*, as well as variables
    tied to a class or object (static and instance variables). Instance
    variables are sometimes known as fields or properties.

-   Unlike Java, Dart doesn’t have the keywords `public`, `protected`,
    and `private`. If an identifier starts with an underscore (\_), it’s
    private to its library. For details, see
    [Libraries and visibility](#libraries-and-visibility).

-   *Identifiers* can start with a letter or \_, followed by any
    combination of those characters plus digits.

-   Sometimes it matters whether something is an *expression* or a
    *statement*, so we’ll be precise about those two words.

-   Dart tools can report two kinds of problems: warnings and errors.
    Warnings are just indications that your code might not work, but
    they don’t prevent your program from executing. Errors can be either
    compile-time or run-time. A compile-time error prevents the code
    from executing at all; a run-time error results in an
    [exception](#exceptions) being raised while the code executes.

<ul>
  <li id="runtime-modes" class="no_toc" markdown="1">
  Dart has two <em id="runtime-modes">runtime modes</em>:
  production and checked. We recommend that
  you develop and debug in checked mode, and deploy to production mode.

  *Production mode* is the default runtime mode of a Dart program,
  optimized for speed. Production mode ignores [assert
  statements](#assert) and static types.

  *Checked mode* is a developer-friendly mode that helps you catch some
  type errors during runtime. For example, if you assign a non-number to a
  variable declared as a `num`, then checked mode throws an exception.
  </li>
</ul>

## Keywords {#keywords}

The following table lists the words that the Dart language treats specially.

{% assign bii = '&nbsp;<sup title="built-in-identifier" alt="built-in-identifier">1</sup>' %}
{% assign lrw = '&nbsp;<sup title="limited reserved word" alt="limited reserved word">2</sup>' %}

| abstract{{bii}}   | continue          | false             | new               | this              |
| as{{bii}}         | default           | final             | null              | throw             |
| assert            | deferred{{bii}}   | finally           | operator{{bii}}   | true              |
| async{{lrw}}      | do                | for               | part{{bii}}       | try               |
| async*{{lrw}}     | dynamic{{bii}}    | get{{bii}}        | rethrow           | typedef{{bii}}    |
| await{{lrw}}      | else              | if                | return            | var               |
| break             | enum              | implements{{bii}} | set{{bii}}        | void              |
| case              | export{{bii}}     | import{{bii}}     | static{{bii}}     | while             |
| catch             | external{{bii}}   | in                | super             | with              |
| class             | extends           | is                | switch            | yield{{lrw}}      |
| const             | factory{{bii}}    | library{{bii}}    | sync*{{lrw}}      | yield*{{lrw}}     |
{:.table .table-striped .nowrap}

<sup>1</sup> Words with the superscript **1**
are *built-in identifiers*. Avoid using
built-in identifiers as identifiers, and never use
them for class or type names. Built-in identifiers exist to ease
porting from JavaScript to Dart. For example,
if some JavaScript code has a variable named `factory`, you don't have
to rename it when you port the code to Dart.

<sup>2</sup> Words with the superscript **2**
are newer, limited reserved words related to asynchrony support
that's being added after Dart's 1.0 release.
You can't use `async`, `await`, or `yield` as
an identifier in any function body marked with `async`, `async*`, or `sync*`.
For more information, see
[Dart Language Asynchrony Support: Phase 1](/articles/await-async/)
and the [Dart Language Specification](/docs/spec/).

All other words in the keyword table are <em>reserved words</em>.
You can't use reserved words as identifiers.


## Variables {#variables}

Here’s an example of creating a variable and assigning a value to it:

<!-- ch02/creating_a_variable.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var name = 'Bob';
{% endprettify %}

Variables are references. The variable called `name` contains a
reference to a String object with a value of “Bob”.


### Default value {#default-value}
{:.no_toc}

Uninitialized variables have an initial value of `null`. Even variables
with numeric types are initially null, because numbers are objects.

<!-- ch02/numbers_are_objects.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
int lineCount;
assert(lineCount == null);
// Variables (even if they will be numbers) are initially null.
{% endprettify %}

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
The `assert()` call is ignored in production mode. In checked mode,
<code>assert(<em>condition</em>)</code>
throws an exception unless *condition* is true. For details,
see the [Assert](#assert) section.
</aside>


### Optional types {#optional-types}
{:.no_toc}

You have the option of adding static types to your variable
declarations:

<!-- ch02/static_types.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
String name = 'Bob';
{% endprettify %}

Adding types is a way to clearly express your intent. Tools such as
compilers and editors can use these types to help you, by providing code
completion and early warnings for bugs and code completion.

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
This chapter follows the [style guide
recommendation](/articles/style-guide/#type-annotations)
of using `var`, rather than type annotations, for local variables.
</aside>


### Final and const {#final-and-const}
{:.no_toc}

If you never intend to change a variable, use `final` or `const`, either
instead of `var` or in addition to a type. A final variable can be set
only once; a const variable is a compile-time constant.

A top-level or class variable that’s declared as `final` is initialized
the first time it’s used:

<!-- ch02/final_initialization.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
final name = 'Bob';   // Or: final String name = 'Bob';
// name = 'Alice';    // Uncommenting this results in an error
{% endprettify %}

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
Lazy initialization of final variables helps apps start up faster.
</aside>

Use `const` for variables that you want to be compile-time constants. If
the const variable is at the class level, mark it `static const`.
(Instance variables can’t be const.) Where you declare the variable, set
the value to a compile-time constant such as a literal, a const
variable, or the result of an arithmetic operation on constant numbers:

<!-- ch02/const.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
const bar = 1000000;       // Unit of pressure (in dynes/cm2)
const atm = 1.01325 * bar; // Standard atmosphere
{% endprettify %}


## Built-in types {#built-in-types}

The Dart language has special support for the following types:

-   numbers

-   strings

-   booleans

-   lists (also known as *arrays*)

-   maps

-   symbols

You can initialize an object of any of these special types using a
literal. For example, `'this is a
    string'` is a string literal, and `true` is a boolean literal.

Because every variable in Dart refers to an object—an instance of a
*class*—you can usually use *constructors* to initialize variables. Some
of the built-in types have their own constructors. For example, you can
use the `Map()` constructor to create a map, using code such as
`new Map()`.


### Numbers {#numbers}
{:.no_toc}

Dart numbers come in two flavors:

[`int`](http://api.dartlang.org/dart_core/int.html)

:   Integer values, which generally should be in the range
    -2<sup>53</sup> to 2<sup>53</sup>

[`double`](http://api.dartlang.org/dart_core/double.html)

:   64-bit (double-precision) floating-point numbers, as specified by
    the IEEE 754 standard

Both `int` and `double` are subtypes of
[`num`.](http://api.dartlang.org/dart_core/num.html) The num type
includes basic operators such as +, -, /, and \*, as well as bitwise
operators such as \>\>. The num type is also where you’ll find
`abs()`,` ceil()`, and `floor()`, among other methods. If num and its
subtypes don’t have what you’re looking for, the
[Math](http://api.dartlang.org/dart_math.html) library might.

<aside class="alert alert-warning" markdown="1">
**Warning:**
Integers outside of the
-2<sup>53</sup> to 2<sup>53</sup> range currently behave
differently in JavaScript produced from Dart code than they do when
the same Dart code runs in the Dart VM. The reason is that Dart is
specified to have arbitrary-precision integers, but JavaScript isn't.
See [issue 1533](http://dartbug.com/1533) for details.
</aside>

Integers are numbers without a decimal point. Here are some examples of
defining integer literals:

<!-- ch02/integer_literals.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var x = 1;
var hex = 0xDEADBEEF;
var bigInt = 346534658346524376592384765923749587398457294759347029438709349347;
{% endprettify %}

If a number includes a decimal, it is a double. Here are some examples
of defining double literals:

<!-- ch02/double_literals.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var y = 1.1;
var exponents = 1.42e5;
{% endprettify %}

Here’s how you turn a string into a number, or vice versa:

<!-- ch02/number_conversion.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
// String -> int
var one = int.parse('1');
assert(one == 1);

// String -> double
var onePointOne = double.parse('1.1');
assert(onePointOne == 1.1);

// int -> String
String oneAsString = 1.toString();
assert(oneAsString == '1');

// double -> String
String piAsString = 3.14159.toStringAsFixed(2);
assert(piAsString == '3.14');
{% endprettify %}

The int type specifies the traditional bitwise shift (\<\<, \>\>), AND
(&), and OR (|) operators. For example:

<!-- ch02/bit_shifting.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
assert((3 << 1) == 6);  // 0011 << 1 == 0110
assert((3 >> 1) == 1);  // 0011 >> 1 == 0001
assert((3 | 4)  == 7);  // 0011 | 0100 == 0111
{% endprettify %}


### Strings {#strings}
{:.no_toc}

A Dart string is a sequence of UTF-16 code units. You can use either
single or double quotes to create a string:

<!-- ch02/quoting.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var s1 = 'Single quotes work well for string literals.';
var s2 = "Double quotes work just as well.";
var s3 = 'It\'s easy to escape the string delimiter.';
var s4 = "It's even easier to just use the other string delimiter.";
{% endprettify %}

You can put the value of an expression inside a string by using
`${`*`expression`*`}`. If the expression is an identifier, you can skip
the {}. To get the string corresponding to an object, Dart calls the
object’s `toString()` method.

<!-- ch02/string_interpolation.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var s = 'string interpolation';

assert('Dart has $s, which is very handy.' ==
       'Dart has string interpolation, which is very handy.');
assert('That deserves all caps. ${s.toUpperCase()} is very handy!' ==
       'That deserves all caps. STRING INTERPOLATION is very handy!');
{% endprettify %}

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
The `==` operator tests whether two objects are equivalent. Two
strings are equivalent if they contain the same sequence of code
units.
</aside>

You can concatenate strings using adjacent string literals or the `+`
operator:

<!-- adjacent_string_literals.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var s1 = 'String ' 'concatenation'
         " works even over line breaks.";
assert(s1 == 'String concatenation works even over line breaks.');

var s2 = 'The addition operator '
         + 'works, as well.';
assert(s2 == 'The addition operator works, as well.');
{% endprettify %}

Another way to create a multi-line string: use a triple quote with
either single or double quotation marks:

<!-- ch02/triple_quotes.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var s1 = '''
You can create
multi-line strings like this one.
''';

var s2 = """This is also a
multi-line string.""";
{% endprettify %}

You can create a “raw” string by prefixing it with `r`:

<!-- ch02/raw_strings.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var s = r"In a raw string, even \n isn't special.";
{% endprettify %}

You can use Unicode escapes inside of strings:

<!-- ch02/quoting.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
print('Unicode escapes work: \u2665'); // Unicode escapes work: [heart]
{% endprettify %}

For more information on using strings, see
[Strings and regular expressions](ch03.html#strings-and-regular-expressions).


### Booleans {#booleans}
{:.no_toc}

To represent boolean values, Dart has a type named `bool`. Only two
objects have type bool: the boolean literals, `true` and `false`.

When Dart expects a boolean value, only the value `true` is treated as
true. All other values are treated as false. Unlike in JavaScript,
values such as `1`, `"aString"`, and `someObject` are all treated as
false.

For example, consider the following code, which is valid both as
JavaScript and as Dart code:

<!-- ch02/strictly_booleans.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var name = 'Bob';
if (name) {
  print('You have a name!'); // Prints in JavaScript, not in Dart.
}
{% endprettify %}

If you run this code as JavaScript, it prints “You have a name!” because
`name` is a non-null object. However, in Dart running in *production
mode*, the preceding code doesn’t print at all because `name` is converted to
`false` (because `name
      != true`). In Dart running in *checked mode*, the preceding code
throws an exception because the `name` variable is not a bool.

Here’s another example of code that behaves differently in JavaScript
and Dart:

<!-- ch02/if_one.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
if (1) {
  print('JavaScript prints this line because it thinks 1 is true.');
} else {
  print('Dart in production mode prints this line.');
  // However, in checked mode, if (1) throws an exception.
}
{% endprettify %}

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
The previous two samples work only in production mode, not checked
mode. In checked mode, an exception is thrown if a non-boolean is used
when a boolean value is expected.
</aside>

Dart’s treatment of booleans is designed to avoid the strange behaviors
that can arise when many values can be treated as true. What this means
for you is that, instead of using code like
<code>if (<em>nonbooleanValue</em>)</code>, you should instead
explicitly check for values. For example:

<!-- ch02/empty_string.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
// Check for an empty string.
var fullName = '';
assert(fullName.isEmpty);

// Check for zero.
var hitPoints = 0;
assert(hitPoints <= 0);

// Check for null.
var unicorn;
assert(unicorn == null);

// Check for NaN.
var iMeantToDoThis = 0 / 0;
assert(iMeantToDoThis.isNaN);
{% endprettify %}


### Lists {#lists}
{:.no_toc}

Perhaps the most common collection in nearly every programming language
is the *array*, or ordered group of objects. In Dart, arrays are
[List](http://api.dartlang.org/dart_core/List.html) objects, so we
usually just call them *lists*.

Dart list literals look like JavaScript array literals. Here’s a simple
Dart list:

<!-- ch02/list_literal.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var list = [1, 2, 3];
{% endprettify %}

Lists use zero-based indexing, where 0 is the index of the first element
and `list.length - 1` is the index of the last element. You can get a
list’s length and refer to list elements just as you would in
JavaScript:

<!-- ch02/list_indexing.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var list = [1, 2, 3];
assert(list.length == 3);
assert(list[1] == 2);
{% endprettify %}

The List type has many handy methods for manipulating lists. For more
information about lists, see [Generics](#generics) and
[Collections](ch03.html#collections).


### Maps {#maps}
{:.no_toc}

In general, a map is an object that associates keys and values. Both
keys and values can be any type of object. Each *key* occurs only once,
but you can use the same *value* multiple times. Dart support for maps
is provided by map literals and the
[Map](http://api.dartlang.org/dart_core/Map.html) type.

Here are a couple of simple Dart maps, created using map literals:

<!-- ch02/map_literal.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var gifts = {
// Keys      Values
  'first' : 'partridge',
  'second': 'turtledoves',
  'fifth' : 'golden rings'
};

var nobleGases = {
// Keys  Values
  2 :   'helium',
  10:   'neon',
  18:   'argon',
};
{% endprettify %}

You can create the same objects using a Map constructor:

<!-- ch02/map_constructor.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var gifts = new Map();
gifts['first'] = 'partridge';
gifts['second'] = 'turtledoves';
gifts['fifth'] = 'golden rings';

var nobleGases = new Map();
nobleGases[2] = 'helium';
nobleGases[10] = 'neon';
nobleGases[18] = 'argon';
{% endprettify %}

Add a new key-value pair to an existing map just as you would in
JavaScript:

<!-- ch02/map_add_item.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var gifts = {'first': 'partridge'};
gifts['fourth'] = 'calling birds'; // Add a key-value pair
{% endprettify %}

Retrieve a value from a map the same way you would in JavaScript:

<!-- ch02/map_retrieve_item.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var gifts = {'first': 'partridge'};
assert(gifts['first'] == 'partridge');
{% endprettify %}

If you look for a key that isn’t in a map, you get a null in return:

<!-- ch02/map_missing_key.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var gifts = {'first': 'partridge'};
assert(gifts['fifth'] == null);
{% endprettify %}

Use `.length` to get the number of key-value pairs in the map:

<!-- ch02/map_length.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var gifts = {'first': 'partridge'};
gifts['fourth'] = 'calling birds';
assert(gifts.length == 2);
{% endprettify %}

For more information about maps, see
[Generics](#generics) and
[Maps](ch03.html#maps).


### Symbols {#symbols}
{:.no_toc}

A [Symbol](http://api.dartlang.org/dart_core/Symbol.html) object
represents an operator or identifier declared in a Dart program. You
might never need to use symbols, but they're invaluable for APIs that
refer to identifiers by name, because minification changes identifier
names but not identifier symbols.

To get the symbol for an identifier, use a symbol literal, which is just
`#` followed by the identifier:

<!-- ch02/symbols.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
#radix  // The symbol literal for an identifier named 'radix'.
#bar    // The symbol literal for an identifier named 'bar'.
{% endprettify %}

For more information on symbols, see
[dart:mirrors - reflection](ch03.html#dartmirrors---reflection).


## Functions {#functions}

Here’s an example of implementing a function:

<!-- ch02/function_types.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
void printNumber(num number) {
  print('The number is $number.');
}
{% endprettify %}

Although the style guide recommends specifying the parameter and return
types, you don’t have to:

<!-- ch02/function_omitting_types.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
printNumber(number) { // Omitting types is OK.
  print('The number is $number.');
}
{% endprettify %}

For functions that contain just one expression, you can use a shorthand
syntax:

<!-- ch02/function_shorthand.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
printNumber(number) => print('The number is $number.');
{% endprettify %}

The <code>=> <em>expr</em>;</code> syntax is a shorthand for
<code>{ return <em>expr</em>;}</code>. In the `printNumber()` function, the expression is the
call to the top-level `print()` function.

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
Only an *expression*—not a *statement*—can appear between the arrow
(=\>) and the semicolon (;). For example, you can’t put an [if
statement](#if-and-else) there, but you can use a [conditional (`?:`)
expression](#other-operators).
</aside>

You can use types with =\>, although the convention is not to do so:

<!-- ch02/function_calling.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
printNumber(num number) => print('The number is $number.');
{% endprettify %}

Here’s an example of calling a function:

<!-- ch02/function_calling.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
printNumber(123);
{% endprettify %}

A function can have two types of parameters: required and optional. The
required parameters are listed first, followed by any optional
parameters.


### Optional parameters {#optional-parameters}
{:.no_toc}

Optional parameters can be either positional or named, but not both.

Both kinds of optional parameter can have default values. The default
values must be compile-time constants such as literals. If no default
value is provided, the value is `null`.

#### Optional named parameters {#optional-named-parameters}
{:.no_toc}

When calling a function, you can specify named parameters using
<code><em>paramName</em>: <em>value</em></code>. For example:

<!-- ch02/use_named_parameters.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
enableFlags(bold: true, hidden: false);
{% endprettify %}

When defining a function, use
<code>{<em>param1</em>, <em>param2</em>, …}</code>
to specify named parameters:

<!-- ch02/specify_named_parameters.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
/// Sets the [bold] and [hidden] flags to the values you specify.
enableFlags({bool bold, bool hidden}) {
  // ...
}
{% endprettify %}

Use a colon (`:`) to specify default values:

<!-- ch02/specify_default_values.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
/// Sets the [bold] and [hidden] flags to the values you specify,
/// defaulting to false.
enableFlags({bool bold: false, bool hidden: false}) {
  // ...
}

enableFlags(bold: true); // bold will be true; hidden will be false.
{% endprettify %}

#### Optional positional parameters {#optional-positional-parameters}
{:.no_toc}

Wrapping a set of function parameters in `[]` marks them as optional
positional parameters:

<!-- ch02/optional_positional_parameters.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
String say(String from, String msg, [String device]) {
  var result = '$from says $msg';
  if (device != null) {
    result = '$result with a $device';
  }
  return result;
}
{% endprettify %}

Here’s an example of calling this function without the optional
parameter:

<!-- ch02/optional_positional_parameters.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
assert(say('Bob', 'Howdy') == 'Bob says Howdy');
{% endprettify %}

And here’s an example of calling this function with the third parameter:

<!-- ch02/optional_positional_parameters.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
assert(say('Bob', 'Howdy', 'smoke signal') ==
    'Bob says Howdy with a smoke signal');
{% endprettify %}

Use `=` to specify default values:

<!-- ch02/optional_positional_parameter_default.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
String say(String from, String msg,
    [String device = 'carrier pigeon', String mood]) {
  var result = '$from says $msg';
  if (device != null) {
    result = '$result with a $device';
  }
  if (mood != null) {
    result = '$result (in a $mood mood)';
  }
  return result;
}

assert(say('Bob', 'Howdy') == 'Bob says Howdy with a carrier pigeon');
{% endprettify %}


### The main() function {#the-main-function}
{:.no_toc}

Every app must have a top-level `main()` function, which serves as the
entrypoint to the app. The `main()` function returns `void` and has an
optional `List<String>` parameter for arguments.

Here's an example of the `main()` function for a web app:

<!-- from Dart Editor's default web app -->
{% prettify dart %}
void main() {
  querySelector("#sample_text_id")
    ..text = "Click me!"
    ..onClick.listen(reverseText);
}
{% endprettify %}

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
The `..` operator in the preceding code is a cascade operator, which
allows you to perform multiple operations on the members of a single
object. You'll find out more in [Classes](#classes).
</aside>

Here's an example of the `main()` function for a command-line app that
takes arguments:

<!-- ch02/args.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
// Run the app like this: dart args.dart 1 test
void main(List<String> arguments) {
  print(arguments);

  assert(arguments.length == 2);
  assert(int.parse(arguments[0]) == 1);
  assert(arguments[1] == 'test');
}
{% endprettify %}

You can use the [args library](https://pub.dartlang.org/packages/args) to
define and parse command-line arguments.


### Functions as first-class objects {#functions-as-first-class-objects}
{:.no_toc}

You can pass a function as a parameter to another function. For example:

<!-- from ch02/function_as_parameter.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
printElement(element) {
  print(element);
}

var list = [1, 2, 3];
list.forEach(printElement); // Pass printElement as a parameter.
{% endprettify %}

You can also assign a function to a variable, such as:

<!-- from ch02/function_as_variable.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var loudify = (msg) => '!!! ${msg.toUpperCase()} !!!';
assert(loudify('hello') == '!!! HELLO !!!');
{% endprettify %}


### Lexical scope {#lexical-scope}
{:.no_toc}

Dart is a lexically scoped language, which means that the scope of
variables is determined statically, simply by the layout of the code.
You can “follow the curly braces outwards” to see if a variable is in
scope.

Here is an example of nested functions with variables at each scope
level:

<!-- ch02/nested_functions.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var topLevel = true;

main() {
  var insideMain = true;

  myFunction() {
    var insideFunction = true;

    nestedFunction() {
      var insideNestedFunction = true;

      assert(topLevel);
      assert(insideMain);
      assert(insideFunction);
      assert(insideNestedFunction);
    }
  }
}
{% endprettify %}

Notice how `nestedFunction()` can use variables from every level, all
the way up to the top level.


### Lexical closures {#lexical-closures}
{:.no_toc}

A *closure* is a function object that has access to variables in its
lexical scope, even when the function is used outside of its original
scope.

Functions can close over variables defined in surrounding scopes. In the
following example, `adder()` captures the variable `addBy`. Wherever the
returned function goes, it remembers `addBy`.

<!-- ch02/function_closure.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
/// Returns a function that adds [addBy] to a number.
Function makeAdder(num addBy) {
  adder(num i) {
    return addBy + i;
  }
  return adder;
}

main() {
  var add2 = makeAdder(2); // Create a function that adds 2.
  var add4 = makeAdder(4); // Create a function that adds 4.

  assert(add2(3) == 5);
  assert(add4(3) == 7);
}
{% endprettify %}


### Testing functions for equality {#testing-functions-for-equality}
{:.no_toc}

Here's an example of testing top-level functions, static methods, and
instance methods for equality:

<!-- ch02/function_equality_2.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
foo() {}               // A top-level function

class SomeClass {
  static void bar() {} // A static method
  void baz() {}        // An instance method
}

main() {
  var x;

  // Comparing top-level functions.
  x = foo;
  assert(foo == x);

  // Comparing static methods.
  x = A.bar;
  assert(A.bar == x);

  // Comparing instance methods.
  var v = new A(); // Instance #1 of A
  var w = new A(); // Instance #2 of A
  var y = w;
  x = w.baz;

  // These closures refer to the same instance (#2),
  // so they're equal.
  assert(y.baz == x);

  // These closures refer to different instances,
  // so they're unequal.
  assert(v.baz != w.baz);
}
{% endprettify %}


### Return values {#return-values}
{:.no_toc}

All functions return a value. If no return value is specified, the
statement `return null;` is implicitly appended to the function body.


## Operators {#operators}

Dart defines the operators shown in the following table.
You can override many of these operators, as described in
[Overridable operators](#overridable-operators).

|--------------------------+------------------------------------------------|
|Description               | Operator                                       |
|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| unary postfix            | <code><em>expr</em>++</code>    <code><em>expr</em>--</code>    `()`    `[]`    `.`             |
| unary prefix             | <code>-<em>expr</em></code>    <code>!<em>expr</em></code>    <code>~<em>expr</em></code>    <code>++<em>expr</em></code>    <code>--<em>expr</em></code>   |
| multiplicative           | `*`    `/`    `%`    `~/`                      |
| additive                 | `+`    `-`                                     |
| shift                    | `<<`    `>>`                                   |
| bitwise AND              | `&`                                            |
| bitwise XOR              | `^`                                            |
| bitwise OR               | `|`                                            |
| relational&nbsp;and&nbsp;type&nbsp;test | `>=`    `>`    `<=`    `<`    `as`    `is`    `is!`      |
| equality                 | `==`    `!=`                                   |
| logical AND              | `&&`                                           |
| logical OR               | `||`                                           |
| conditional              | <code><em>expr1</em> ? <em>expr2</em> : <em>expr3</em></code>        |
| cascade                  | `..`                                           |
| assignment               | `=`    `*=`    `/=`    `~/=`    `%=`    `+=`    `-=`    `<<=`    `>>=`    `&=`    `^=`    `|=`                 |
{:.table .table-striped}

When you use operators, you create expressions. Here are some examples
of operator expressions:

<!-- TODO: write test for this -->
{% prettify dart %}
a++
a + b
a = b
a == b
a ? b: c
a is T
{% endprettify %}

In the preceding operator table,
each operator has higher precedence than the operators in the rows
that follow it. For example, the multiplicative operator `%` has higher
precedence than (and thus executes before) the equality operator `==`,
which has higher precedence than the logical AND operator `&&`. That
precedence means that the following two lines of code execute the same
way:

<!-- ch02/precedence.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
// 1: Parens improve readability.
if ((n % i == 0) && (d % i == 0))

// 2: Harder to read, but equivalent.
if (n % i == 0 && d % i == 0)
{% endprettify %}

<aside class="alert alert-warning" markdown="1">
**Warning:**
For operators that work on two operands, the leftmost operand
determines which version of the operator is used. For example, if you
have a Vector object and a Point object, `aVector + aPoint` uses the
Vector version of +.
</aside>


### Arithmetic operators {#arithmetic-operators}
{:.no_toc}

Dart supports the usual arithmetic operators, as shown in the following table.

|-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------|
| Operator                    | Meaning                                   |
|-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------|
| `+`                         | Add
| `–`                         | Subtract
| <code>-<em>expr</em></code> | Unary minus, also known as negation (reverse the sign of the expression)
| `*`                         | Multiply
| `/`                         | Divide
| `~/`                        | Divide, returning an integer result
| `%`                         | Get the remainder of an integer division (modulo)
{:.table .table-striped}

Example:

<!-- ch02/arithmetic_operators.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
assert(2 + 3 == 5);
assert(2 - 3 == -1);
assert(2 * 3 == 6);
assert(5 / 2 == 2.5);   // Result is a double
assert(5 ~/ 2 == 2);    // Result is an integer
assert(5 % 2 == 1);     // Remainder

print('5/2 = ${5~/2} remainder ${5%2}'); // 5/2 = 2 remainder 1
{% endprettify %}

Dart also supports both prefix and postfix increment and decrement
operators.

|-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------|
| Operator                    | Meaning                                   |
|-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------|
| <code>++<em>var</em></code> | <code><em>var</em> = <em>var</em> + 1</code> (expression value is <code><em>var</em> + 1</code>)
| <code><em>var</em>++</code> | <code><em>var</em> = <em>var</em> + 1</code> (expression value is <code><em>var</em></code>)
| <code>--<em>var</em></code> | <code><em>var</em> = <em>var</em> – 1</code> (expression value is <code><em>var</em> – 1</code>)
| <code><em>var</em>--</code> | <code><em>var</em> = <em>var</em> – 1</code> (expression value is <code><em>var</em></code>)
{:.table .table-striped}

Example:

<!-- ch02/op_increment_decrement.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var a, b;

a = 0;
b = ++a;        // Increment a before b gets its value.
assert(a == b); // 1 == 1

a = 0;
b = a++;        // Increment a AFTER b gets its value.
assert(a != b); // 1 != 0

a = 0;
b = --a;        // Decrement a before b gets its value.
assert(a == b); // -1 == -1

a = 0;
b = a--;        // Decrement a AFTER b gets its value.
assert(a != b); // -1 != 0
{% endprettify %}


### Equality and relational operators {#equality-and-relational-operators}
{:.no_toc}

The following table lists the meanings of equality and relational operators.

|-----------+-------------------------------------------|
| Operator  | Meaning                                   |
|-----------+-------------------------------------------|
| `==`      |       Equal; see discussion below
| `!=`      |       Not equal
| `>`       |       Greater than
| `<`       |       Less than
| `>=`      |       Greater than or equal to
| `<=`      |       Less than or equal to
{:.table .table-striped}

To test whether two objects x and y represent the same thing, use the
`==` operator. (In the rare case where you need to know whether two
objects are the exact same object, use the
[identical()](https://api.dartlang.org/apidocs/channels/stable/dartdoc-viewer/dart-core#id_identical) function instead.) Here’s
how the `==` operator works:

1.  If *x* or *y* is null, return true if both are null, and false if only
    one is null.

2.  Return the result of the method invocation
    <code><em>x</em>.==(<em>y</em>)</code>. (That’s right,
    operators such as `==` are methods that are invoked on their first
    operand. You can even override many operators, including `==`, as
    you’ll see in
    [Overridable operators](#overridable-operators).)

Here’s an example of using each of the equality and relational
operators:

<!-- ch02/op_equality.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
assert(2 == 2);
assert(2 != 3);
assert(3 > 2);
assert(2 < 3);
assert(3 >= 3);
assert(2 <= 3);
{% endprettify %}


### Type test operators {#type-test-operators}
{:.no_toc}

The `as`, `is`, and `is!` operators are handy for checking types at
runtime.

|-----------+-------------------------------------------|
| Operator  | Meaning                                   |
|-----------+-------------------------------------------|
| `as`      | Typecast
| `is`      | True if the object has the specified type
| `is!`     | False if the object has the specified type
{:.table .table-striped}

The result of `obj is T` is true if `obj` implements the interface
specified by `T`. For example, `obj is Object` is always true.

Use the `as` operator to cast an object to a particular type. In
general, you should use it as a shorthand for an `is` test on an object
following by an expression using that object. For example, consider the
following code:

<!-- ch02/op_as.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
if (emp is Person) { // Type check
  emp.firstName = 'Bob';
}
{% endprettify %}

You can make the code shorter using the `as` operator:

<!-- ch02/op_increment_decrement.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
(emp as Person).firstName = 'Bob';
{% endprettify %}

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
The code isn’t equivalent. If `emp` is null or not a Person, the
first example (with `is`) does nothing; the second (with `as`) throws
an exception.
</aside>


### Assignment operators {#assignment-operators}
{:.no_toc}

As you’ve already seen, you assign values using the `=` operator. You
can also use compound assignment operators such as `+=`, which combine
an operation with an assignment.

| `=`  | `–=` | `/=`  | `%=`  | `>>=` | `^=`
| `+=` | `*=` | `~/=` | `<<=` | `&=`  | `|=`
{:.table}

Here’s how compound assignment operators work:

|-----------+----------------------+-----------------------|
|           | Compound assignment  | Equivalent expression |
|-----------+----------------------+-----------------------|
|**For an operator <em>op</em>:** | <code>a <em>op</em>= b</code> | <code>a = a <em>op</em> b</code>
|**Example:**                     |`a += b`                       | `a = a + b`
{:.table}

The following example uses both assignment and compound assignment
operators:

<!-- ch02/op_assign.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var a = 2;           // Assign using =
a *= 3;              // Assign and multiply: a = a * 3
assert(a == 6);
{% endprettify %}


### Logical operators {#logical-operators}
{:.no_toc}

You can invert or combine boolean expressions using the logical
operators.

|-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------|
| Operator                    | Meaning                                   |
|-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------|
| <code>!<em>expr</em></code> | inverts the following expression (changes false to true, and vice versa)
| `||`                        | logical OR
| `&&`                        | logical AND
{:.table .table-striped}

Here’s an example of using the logical operators:

<!-- ch02/op_logical.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
if (!done && (col == 0 || col == 3)) {
  // ...Do something...
}
{% endprettify %}


### Bitwise and shift operators {#bitwise-and-shift-operators}
{:.no_toc}

You can manipulate the individual bits of numbers in Dart. Usually,
you’d use these bitwise and shift operators with integers.

|-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------|
| Operator                    | Meaning                                   |
|-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------|
| `&`                         | AND
| `|`                         | OR
| `^`                         | XOR
| <code>~<em>expr</em></code> | Unary bitwise complement (0s become 1s; 1s become 0s)
| `<<`                        | Shift left
| `>>`                        | Shift right
{:.table .table-striped}

Here’s an example of using bitwise and shift operators:

<!-- ch02/op_bitwise.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
final value = 0x22;
final bitmask = 0x0f;

assert((value & bitmask)  == 0x02);  // AND
assert((value & ~bitmask) == 0x20);  // AND NOT
assert((value | bitmask)  == 0x2f);  // OR
assert((value ^ bitmask)  == 0x2d);  // XOR
assert((value << 4)       == 0x220); // Shift left
assert((value >> 4)       == 0x02);  // Shift right
{% endprettify %}


### Other operators {#other-operators}
{:.no_toc}

A few operators remain, most of which you’ve already seen in other
examples.

|----------+-------------------------------------------|
| Operator | Name              |              Meaning                                   |
|-----------+-------------------------------------------|
| `()`     | Function application | Represents a function call
| `[]`     | List access          | Refers to the value at the specified index in the list
| <code><em>expr1</em> ? <em>expr2</em> : <em>expr3</em> | Conditional | If _expr1_ is true, executes _expr2_; otherwise, executes _expr3_
| `.`      | Member access        | Refers to a property of an expression; example: `foo.bar` selects property `bar` from expression `foo`
| `..`     | Cascade              | Allows you to perform multiple operations on the members of a single object; described in [Classes](#classes)
{:.table .table-striped}


## Control flow statements {#control-flow-statements}

You can control the flow of your Dart code using any of the following:

-   `if` and `else`

-   `for` loops

-   `while` and `do`-`while` loops

-   `break` and `continue`

-   `switch` and `case`

-   `assert`

You can also affect the control flow using `try-catch` and `throw`, as
explained in [Exceptions](#exceptions).


### If and else {#if-and-else}
{:.no_toc}

Dart supports `if` statements with optional `else` statements, as the
next sample shows. Also see conditional expressions (?:), which are
covered in [Other operators](#other-operators).

<!-- ch02/flow_if_else.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
if (isRaining()) {
  you.bringRainCoat();
} else if (isSnowing()) {
  you.wearJacket();
} else {
  car.putTopDown();
}
{% endprettify %}

Remember, unlike JavaScript, Dart treats all values other than `true` as
`false`. See [Booleans](#booleans) for more information.


### For loops {#for-loops}
{:.no_toc}

You can iterate with the standard `for` loop. For example:

<!-- ch02/flow_for_loops.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var message = new StringBuffer("Dart is fun");
for (var i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
  message.write('!');
}
{% endprettify %}

Closures inside of Dart’s `for` loops capture the value of the index,
avoiding a common pitfall found in JavaScript. For example, consider:

<!-- ch02/flow_for_loops.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var callbacks = [];
for (var i = 0; i < 2; i++) {
  callbacks.add(() => print(i));
}
callbacks.forEach((c) => c());
{% endprettify %}

The output is `0` and then `1`, as expected. In contrast, the example
would print `2` and then `2` in JavaScript.

If the object that you are iterating over is an Iterable, you can use the
<a href="https://api.dartlang.org/apidocs/channels/stable/dartdoc-viewer/dart-core.Iterable#id_forEach"><code>forEach()</code> method.</a>
Using `forEach()` is a good option if you don’t need to
know the current iteration counter:

<!-- ch02/flow_for_loops.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
candidates.forEach((candidate) => candidate.interview());
{% endprettify %}

Iterable classes such as List and Set also support the `for-in` form of
[iteration](ch03.html#iteration):

<!-- ch02/flow_for_loops.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var collection = [0, 1, 2];
for (var x in collection) {
  print(x);
}
{% endprettify %}


### While and do-while {#while-and-do-while}
{:.no_toc}

A `while` loop evaluates the condition before the loop:

<!-- ch02/flow_while.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
while (!isDone()) {
  doSomething();
}
{% endprettify %}

A `do`-`while` loop evaluates the condition *after* the loop:

<!-- ch02/flow_while.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
do {
  printLine();
} while (!atEndOfPage());
{% endprettify %}


### Break and continue {#break-and-continue}
{:.no_toc}

Use `break` to stop looping:

<!-- ch02/flow_break_continue.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
while (true) {
  if (shutDownRequested()) break;
  processIncomingRequests();
}
{% endprettify %}

Use `continue` to skip to the next loop iteration:

<!-- ch02/flow_break_continue.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
for (int i = 0; i < candidates.length; i++) {
  var candidate = candidates[i];
  if (candidate.yearsExperience < 5) {
    continue;
  }
  candidate.interview();
}
{% endprettify %}

You might write that example differently if you’re using a
[Iterable](http://api.dartlang.org/dart_core/Iterable.html) such as a
list or set:

<!-- ch02/flow_break_continue.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
candidates.where((c) => c.yearsExperience >= 5)
          .forEach((c) => c.interview());
{% endprettify %}


### Switch and case {#switch-and-case}
{:.no_toc}

Switch statements in Dart compare integer, string, or compile-time
constants using `==`. The compared objects must all be instances of the
same class (and not of any of its subtypes), and the class must not
override `==`.

Each non-empty `case` clause ends with a `break` statement, as a rule.
Other valid ways to end a non-empty `case` clause are a `continue`,
`throw`, or `return` statement.

Use a `default` clause to execute code when no `case` clause matches:

<!-- ch02/flow_switch_case.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var command = 'OPEN';
switch (command) {
  case 'CLOSED':
    executeClosed();
    break;
  case 'PENDING':
    executePending();
    break;
  case 'APPROVED':
    executeApproved();
    break;
  case 'DENIED':
    executeDenied();
    break;
  case 'OPEN':
    executeOpen();
    break;
  default:
    executeUnknown();
}
{% endprettify %}

The following example omits the `break` statement in the `case` clause,
thus generating an error:

<!-- ch02/flow_switch_case.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var command = 'OPEN';
switch (command) {
  case 'OPEN':
    executeOpen();
    // ERROR: Missing break causes an exception to be thrown!!

  case 'CLOSED':
    executeClosed();
    break;
}
{% endprettify %}

However, Dart does support empty `case` clauses, allowing a form of
fall-through:

<!-- ch02/flow_switch_case.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var command = 'CLOSED';
switch (command) {
  case 'CLOSED': // Empty case falls through.
  case 'NOW_CLOSED':
    // Runs for both CLOSED and NOW_CLOSED.
    executeNowClosed();
    break;
}
{% endprettify %}

If you really want fall-through, you can use a `continue` statement and
a label:

<!-- ch02/flow_switch_case.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var command = 'CLOSED';
switch (command) {
  case 'CLOSED':
    executeClosed();
    continue nowClosed; // Continues executing at the nowClosed label.

nowClosed:
  case 'NOW_CLOSED':
    // Runs for both CLOSED and NOW_CLOSED.
    executeNowClosed();
    break;
}
{% endprettify %}

A `case` clause can have local variables, which are visible only inside
the scope of that clause.


### Assert {#assert}
{:.no_toc}

Use an `assert` statement to disrupt normal execution if a boolean
condition is false. You can find examples of assert statements
throughout this tour. Here are some more:

<!-- ch02/flow_assert.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
assert(text != null);  // Make sure the variable has a non-null value.
assert(number < 100);  // Make sure the value is less than 100.
assert(urlString.startsWith('https')); // Make sure this is an HTTPS URL.
{% endprettify %}

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
Assert statements work only in checked mode. They have no effect in
production mode.
</aside>

Inside the parentheses after `assert`, you can put any expression that
resolves to a boolean value or to a function. If the expression’s value
or function’s return value is true, the assertion succeeds and execution
continues. If it's false, the assertion fails and an exception (an
[AssertionError](http://api.dartlang.org/dart_core/AssertionError.html))
is thrown.


## Exceptions {#exceptions}

Your Dart code can throw and catch exceptions. Exceptions are errors
indicating that something unexpected happened. If the exception isn’t
caught, the isolate that raised the exception is suspended, and
typically the isolate and its program are terminated.

In contrast to Java, all of Dart’s exceptions are unchecked exceptions.
Methods do not declare which exceptions they might throw, and you are
not required to catch any exceptions.

Dart provides
[Exception](http://api.dartlang.org/dart_core/Exception.html) and
[Error](http://api.dartlang.org/docs/continuous/dart_core/Error.html)
types, as well as numerous predefined subtypes. You can, of course,
define your own exceptions. However, Dart programs can throw any
non-null object—not just Exception and Error objects—as an exception.


### Throw {#throw}
{:.no_toc}

Here’s an example of throwing, or *raising*, an exception:

<!-- PENDING: NEED TEST FOR THIS -->
{% prettify dart %}
throw new FormatException('expected at least one section');
{% endprettify %}

You can also throw arbitrary objects:

<!-- ch02/flow_exceptions.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
throw 'Out of llamas!';
{% endprettify %}

Because throwing an exception is an expression, you can throw exceptions
in =\> statements, as well as anywhere else that allows expressions:

<!-- ch02/flow_exceptions.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
distanceTo(Point other) => throw new UnimplementedError();
{% endprettify %}


### Catch {#catch}
{:.no_toc}

Catching, or capturing, an exception stops the exception from
propagating. Catching an exception gives you a chance to handle it:

<!-- ch02/flow_exceptions.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
try {
  breedMoreLlamas();
} on OutOfLlamasException {
  buyMoreLlamas();
}
{% endprettify %}

To handle code that can throw more than one type of exception, you can
specify multiple catch clauses. The first catch clause that matches the
thrown object’s type handles the exception. If the catch clause does not
specify a type, that clause can handle any type of thrown object:

<!-- ch02/flow_exceptions.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
try {
  breedMoreLlamas();
} on OutOfLlamasException { // A specific exception
  buyMoreLlamas();
} on Exception catch (e) {  // Anything else that is an exception
  print('Unknown exception: $e');
} catch (e) {               // No specified type, handles all
  print('Something really unknown: $e');
}
{% endprettify %}

As the preceding code shows, you can use either `on` or `catch` or both.
Use `on` when you need to specify the exception type. Use `catch` when
your exception handler needs the exception object.


### Finally {#finally}
{:.no_toc}

To ensure that some code runs whether or not an exception is thrown, use
a `finally` clause. If no `catch` clause matches the exception, the
exception is propagated after the `finally` clause runs:

<!-- ch02/flow_exceptions.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
try {
  breedMoreLlamas();
} finally {
  cleanLlamaStalls();  // Always clean up, even if an exception is thrown.
}
{% endprettify %}

The `finally` clause runs after any matching `catch` clauses:

<!-- ch02/flow_exceptions.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
try {
  breedMoreLlamas();
} catch(e) {
  print('Error: $e');  // Handle the exception first.
} finally {
  cleanLlamaStalls();  // Then clean up.
}
{% endprettify %}

Learn more by reading the [Exceptions](ch03.html#exceptions) section.


## Classes {#classes}

Dart is an object-oriented language with classes and mixin-based
inheritance. Every object is an instance of a class, and all classes
descend from [Object.](http://api.dartlang.org/dart_core/Object.html)
*Mixin-based inheritance* means that although every class (except for
Object) has exactly one superclass, a class body can be reused in
multiple class hierarchies.

To create an object, you can use the `new` keyword with a *constructor*
for a class. Constructor names can be either <code><em>ClassName</em></code> or
<code><em>ClassName</em>.<em>identifier</em></code>. For example:

<!-- ch02/object_classes.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var jsonData = JSON.decode('{"x":1, "y":2}');

var p1 = new Point(2, 2);              // Create a Point using Point().
var p2 = new Point.fromJson(jsonData); // Create a Point using Point.fromJson().
{% endprettify %}

Objects have *members* consisting of functions and data (*methods* and
*instance variables*, respectively). When you call a method, you *invoke*
it on an object: the method has access to that object’s functions and
data.

Use a dot (.) to refer to an instance variable or method:

<!-- ch02/object_classes.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var p = new Point(2, 2);

p.y = 3;          // Set the value of the instance variable y.
assert(p.y == 3); // Get the value of y.

num distance = p.distanceTo(new Point(4, 4)); // Invoke distanceTo() on p.
{% endprettify %}

Use the cascade operator (..) when you want to perform a series of
operations on the members of a single object:

<!-- ch02/object_classes.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
querySelector('#button')
    ..text = 'Click to Confirm'                        // Get an object. Use its
    ..classes.add('important')                         // instance variables
    ..onClick.listen((e) => window.alert('Confirmed!')); // and methods.
{% endprettify %}

Some classes provide constant constructors. To create a compile-time
constant using a constant constructor, use `const` instead of `new`:

<!-- ch02/object_classes.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var p = const ImmutablePoint(2, 2);
{% endprettify %}

Constructing two identical compile-time constants results in a single,
canonical instance:

<!-- ch02/object_classes.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var a = const ImmutablePoint(1, 1);
var b = const ImmutablePoint(1, 1);

assert(identical(a, b)); // They are the same instance!
{% endprettify %}

The following sections discuss how to implement classes.


### Instance variables {#instance-variables}
{:.no_toc}

Here’s how you declare instance variables:

<!-- ch02/instance_variables.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Point {
  num x;      // Declare an instance variable (x), initially null.
  num y;      // Declare y, initially null.
  num z = 0;  // Declare z, initially 0.
}
{% endprettify %}

All uninitialized instance variables have the value `null`.

All instance variables generate an implicit *getter* method. Non-final
instance variables also generate an implicit *setter* method. For details,
see [Getters and setters](#getters-and-setters).

<!-- ch02/instance_variables.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Point {
  num x;
  num y;
}

main() {
  var point = new Point();
  point.x = 4;             // Use the setter method for x.
  assert(point.x == 4);    // Use the getter method for x.
  assert(point.y == null); // Values default to null.
}
{% endprettify %}

If you initialize an instance variable where it is declared (instead of
in a constructor or method), the value is set when the instance is
created, which is before the constructor and its initializer list
execute.


### Constructors {#constructors}
{:.no_toc}

Declare a constructor by creating a function with the same name as its
class (plus, optionally, an additional identifier as described in
[Named constructors](#named-constructors)).
The most common form of constructor, the generative constructor, creates
a new instance of a class:

<!-- ch02/constructor_long_way.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Point {
  num x;
  num y;

  Point(num x, num y) {
    // There's a better way to do this, stay tuned.
    this.x = x;
    this.y = y;
  }
}
{% endprettify %}

The `this` keyword refers to the current instance.

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
Use `this` only when there is a name conflict. Otherwise, Dart style
omits the `this`.
</aside>

The pattern of assigning a constructor argument to an instance variable
is so common, Dart has syntactic sugar to make it easy:

<!-- ch02/object_classes.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Point {
  num x;
  num y;

  // Syntactic sugar for setting x and y before the constructor body runs.
  Point(this.x, this.y);
}
{% endprettify %}

#### Default constructors {#default-constructors}
{:.no_toc}

If you don’t declare a constructor, a default constructor is provided
for you. The default constructor has no arguments and invokes the
no-argument constructor in the superclass.

#### Constructors aren’t inherited {#constructors-arent-inherited}
{:.no_toc}

Subclasses don’t inherit constructors from their superclass. A subclass
that declares no constructors has only the default (no argument, no
name) constructor.

#### Named constructors {#named-constructors}
{:.no_toc}

Use a named constructor to implement multiple constructors for a class
or to provide extra clarity:

<!-- ch02/named_constructor.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Point {
  num x;
  num y;

  Point(this.x, this.y);

  // Named constructor
  Point.fromJson(Map json) {
    x = json['x'];
    y = json['y'];
  }
}
{% endprettify %}

Remember that constructors are not inherited, which means that a
superclass’s named constructor is not inherited by a subclass. If you
want a subclass to be created with a named constructor defined in the
superclass, you must implement that constructor in the subclass.

#### Invoking a non-default superclass constructor {#invoking-a-non-default-superclass-constructor}
{:.no_toc}

By default, a constructor in a subclass calls the superclass’s unnamed,
no-argument constructor. If the superclass doesn’t have such a
constructor, then you must manually call one of the constructors in the
superclass. Specify the superclass constructor after a colon (`:`), just
before the constructor body (if any).

<!-- ch02/op_as.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Person {
  Person.fromJson(Map data) {
    print('in Person');
  }
}

class Employee extends Person {
  // Person does not have a default constructor;
  // you must call super.fromJson(data).
  Employee.fromJson(Map data) : super.fromJson(data) {
    print('in Employee');
  }
}

main() {
  var emp = new Employee.fromJson({});

  // Prints:
  // in Person
  // in Employee
}
{% endprettify %}

Because the arguments to the superclass constructor are evaluated before
invoking the constructor, an argument can be an expression such as a
function call:

<!-- ch02/method_then_constructor.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Employee extends Person {
  // ...
  Employee() : super.fromJson(findDefaultData());
}
{% endprettify %}

<aside class="alert alert-warning" markdown="1">
**Warning:**
Arguments to the superclass constructor do not have access to `this`.
For example, arguments can call static methods but not instance
methods.
</aside>


#### Initializer list {#initializer-list}
{:.no_toc}

Besides invoking a superclass constructor, you can also initialize
instance variables before the constructor body runs. Separate
initializers with commas.

<!-- ch02/initializer_list.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Point {
  num x;
  num y;

  Point(this.x, this.y);

  // Initializer list sets instance variables before the constructor body runs.
  Point.fromJson(Map jsonMap)
      : x = jsonMap['x'],
        y = jsonMap['y'] {
    print('In Point.fromJson(): ($x, $y)');
  }
}
{% endprettify %}

<aside class="alert alert-warning" markdown="1">
**Warning:**
The right-hand side of an initializer does not have access to `this`.
</aside>


#### Redirecting constructors {#redirecting-constructors}
{:.no_toc}

Sometimes a constructor’s only purpose is to redirect to another
constructor in the same class. A redirecting constructor’s body is
empty, with the constructor call appearing after a colon (:).

<!-- ch02/along_x_axis.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Point {
  num x;
  num y;

  Point(this.x, this.y);                // The main constructor for this class.
  Point.alongXAxis(num x) : this(x, 0); // Delegates to the main constructor.
}
{% endprettify %}

#### Constant constructors {#constant-constructors}
{:.no_toc}

If your class produces objects that never change, you can make these
objects compile-time constants. To do this, define a `const` constructor
and make sure that all instance variables are `final`.

<!-- ch02/immutable_point.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class ImmutablePoint {
  final num x;
  final num y;
  const ImmutablePoint(this.x, this.y);
  static final ImmutablePoint origin = const ImmutablePoint(0, 0);
}
{% endprettify %}

#### Factory constructors {#factory-constructors}
{:.no_toc}

Use the `factory` keyword when implementing a constructor that doesn’t
always create a new instance of its class. For example, a factory
constructor might return an instance from a cache, or it might return an
instance of a subtype.

The following example demonstrates a factory constructor returning
objects from a cache:

<!-- ch02/factory_constructor.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Logger {
  final String name;
  bool mute = false;

  // _cache is library-private, thanks to the _ in front of its name.
  static final Map<String, Logger> _cache = <String, Logger>{};

  factory Logger(String name) {
    if (_cache.containsKey(name)) {
      return _cache[name];
    } else {
      final logger = new Logger._internal(name);
      _cache[name] = logger;
      return logger;
    }
  }

  Logger._internal(this.name);

  void log(String msg) {
    if (!mute) {
      print(msg);
    }
  }
}
{% endprettify %}

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
Factory constructors have no access to `this`.
</aside>

To invoke a factory constructor, you use the `new` keyword:

<!-- ch02/factory_constructor.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var logger = new Logger('UI');
logger.log('Button clicked');
{% endprettify %}


### Methods {#methods}
{:.no_toc}

Methods are functions that provide behavior for an object.

#### Instance methods {#instance-methods}
{:.no_toc}

Instance methods on objects can access instance variables and `this`.
The `distanceTo()` method in the following sample is an example of an
instance method:

<!-- ch02/distance_to.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
import 'dart:math';

class Point {
  num x;
  num y;
  Point(this.x, this.y);

  num distanceTo(Point other) {
    var dx = x - other.x;
    var dy = y - other.y;
    return sqrt(dx * dx + dy * dy);
  }
}
{% endprettify %}

#### Getters and setters {#getters-and-setters}
{:.no_toc}

Getters and setters are special methods that provide read and write
access to an object’s properties. Recall that each instance variable has
an implicit getter, plus a setter if appropriate. You can create
additional properties by implementing getters and setters, using the
`get` and `set` keywords:

<!-- ch02/rectangle.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Rectangle {
  num left;
  num top;
  num width;
  num height;

  Rectangle(this.left, this.top, this.width, this.height);

  // Define two calculated properties: right and bottom.
  num get right             => left + width;
      set right(num value)  => left = value - width;
  num get bottom            => top + height;
      set bottom(num value) => top = value - height;
}

main() {
  var rect = new Rectangle(3, 4, 20, 15);
  assert(rect.left == 3);
  rect.right = 12;
  assert(rect.left == -8);
}
{% endprettify %}

With getters and setters, you can start with instance variables, later
wrapping them with methods, all without changing client code.

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
Operators such as increment (++) work in the expected way, whether or
not a getter is explicitly defined. To avoid any unexpected side
effects, the operator calls the getter exactly once, saving its value
in a temporary variable.
</aside>

#### Abstract methods {#abstract-methods}
{:.no_toc}

Instance, getter, and setter methods can be abstract, defining an
interface but leaving its implementation up to other classes. To make a
method abstract, use a semicolon (;) instead of a method body:

<!-- ch02/doer.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
abstract class Doer {
  // ...Define instance variables and methods...

  void doSomething(); // Define an abstract method.
}

class EffectiveDoer extends Doer {
  void doSomething() {
    // ...Provide an implementation, so the method is not abstract here...
  }
}
{% endprettify %}

Calling an abstract method results in a run-time error.

Also see [Abstract classes](#abstract-classes).

#### Overridable operators {#overridable-operators}
{:.no_toc}

You can override the operators shown in the following table.
For example, if you define a
Vector class, you might define a `+` method to add two vectors.

`<`  | `+`  | `|`  | `[]`
`>`  | `/`  | `^`  | `[]=`
`<=` | `~/` | `&`  | `~`
`>=` | `*`  | `<<` | `==`
`–`  | `%`  | `>>`
{:.table}

Here’s an example of a class that overrides the `+` and `-` operators:

<!-- ch02/vector.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Vector {
  final int x;
  final int y;
  const Vector(this.x, this.y);

  Vector operator +(Vector v) { // Overrides + (a + b).
    return new Vector(x + v.x, y + v.y);
  }

  Vector operator -(Vector v) { // Overrides - (a - b).
    return new Vector(x - v.x, y - v.y);
  }
}

main() {
  final v = new Vector(2, 3);
  final w = new Vector(2, 2);

  assert(v.x == 2 && v.y == 3);             // v   == (2,3)
  assert((v + w).x == 4 && (v + w).y == 5); // v+w == (4,5)
  assert((v - w).x == 0 && (v - w).y == 1); // v-w == (0,1)
}
{% endprettify %}

If you override `==`, you should also override Object's `hashCode` getter.
For an example of overriding `==` and `hashCode`, see
[Implementing map keys](ch03.html#implementing-map-keys).

For more information on overriding, in general, see
[Extending a class](#extending-a-class).


### Abstract classes {#abstract-classes}
{:.no_toc}

Use the `abstract` modifier to define an *abstract class*—a class that
can’t be instantiated. Abstract classes are useful for defining
interfaces, often with some implementation. If you want your abstract
class to appear to be instantiable, define a [factory
constructor](#factory-constructors).

Abstract classes often have [abstract methods](#abstract-methods).
Here’s an example of declaring an abstract class that has an abstract
method:

<!-- ch02/abstract.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
// This class is declared abstract and thus can't be instantiated.
abstract class AbstractContainer {
  // ...Define constructors, fields, methods...

  void updateChildren(); // Abstract method.
}
{% endprettify %}

The following class isn’t abstract, and thus can be instantiated even
though it defines an abstract method:

<!-- ch02/abstract.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class SpecializedContainer extends AbstractContainer {
  // ...Define more constructors, fields, methods...

  void updateChildren() {
    // ...Implement updateChildren()...
  }

  // Abstract method causes a warning but
  // doesn't prevent instantiation.
  void doSomething();
}
{% endprettify %}


### Implicit interfaces {#implicit-interfaces}
{:.no_toc}

Every class implicitly defines an interface containing all the instance
members of the class and of any interfaces it implements. If you want to
create a class A that supports class B’s API without inheriting B’s
implementation, class A should implement the B interface.

A class implements one or more interfaces by declaring them in an
`implements` clause and then providing the APIs required by the
interfaces. For example:

<!-- ch02/imposter.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
// A person. The implicit interface contains greet().
class Person {
  final _name;          // In the interface, but visible only in this library,
  Person(this._name);   // Not in the interface, since this is a constructor.
  String greet(who) => 'Hello, $who. I am $_name.'; // In the interface.
}

// An implementation of the Person interface.
class Imposter implements Person {
  final _name = "";      // We have to define this, but we don't use it.
  String greet(who) => 'Hi $who. Do you know who I am?';
}

greetBob(Person person) => person.greet('bob');

main() {
  print(greetBob(new Person('kathy')));
  print(greetBob(new Imposter()));
}
{% endprettify %}

Here’s an example of specifying that a class implements multiple
interfaces:

<!-- ch02/point_interfaces.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Point implements Comparable, Location {
  // ...
}
{% endprettify %}


### Extending a class {#extending-a-class}
{:.no_toc}

Use `extends` to create a subclass, and `super` to refer to the
superclass:

<!-- smart_tv.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Television {
  void turnOn() {
    _illuminateDisplay();
    _activateIrSensor();
  }
  // ...
}

class SmartTelevision extends Television {
  void turnOn() {
    super.turnOn();
    _bootNetworkInterface();
    _initializeMemory();
    _upgradeApps();
  }
  // ...
}
{% endprettify %}

Subclasses can override instance methods, getters, and setters. Here’s
an example of overriding the Object class’s `noSuchMethod()` method,
which is called whenever code attempts to use a non-existent method or
instance variable:

<!-- ch02/no_such_method.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class A {
  // Unless you override noSuchMethod, using a non-existent member
  // results in a NoSuchMethodError.
  void noSuchMethod(Invocation mirror) {
    print('You tried to use a non-existent member: ${mirror.memberName}');
  }
}
{% endprettify %}

You can use the `@override` annotation to indicate that you are
intentionally overriding a member:

<!-- ch02/ch02_meta/bin/ch02_override.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class A {
  @override
  void noSuchMethod(Invocation mirror) {
    // ...
  }
}
{% endprettify %}

If you use `noSuchMethod()` to implement every possible getter, setter,
and method for a class, then you can use the `@proxy` annotation to
avoid warnings:

<!-- ch02/ch02_meta/bin/ch02_proxy.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
@proxy
class A {
  void noSuchMethod(Invocation mirror) {
    // ...
  }
}
{% endprettify %}

For more information on annotations, see
[Metadata](#metadata).


### Adding features to a class: mixins {#adding-features-to-a-class-mixins}
{:.no_toc}

Mixins are a way of reusing a class's code in multiple class
hierarchies.

To use a mixin, use the `with` keyword followed by one or more mixin
names. The following example shows two classes that use mixins:

<!-- ch02/mixins.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Musician extends Performer with Musical {
  // ...
}

class Maestro extends Person with Musical, Aggressive, Demented {
  Maestro(String maestroName) {
    name = maestroName;
    canConduct = true;
  }
}
{% endprettify %}

To implement a mixin, create a class that extends Object, declares no
constructors, and has no calls to `super`. For example:

<!-- ch02/mixins.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
abstract class Musical {
  bool canPlayPiano = false;
  bool canCompose = false;
  bool canConduct = false;

  void entertainMe() {
    if (canPlayPiano) {
      print('Playing piano');
    } else if (canConduct) {
      print('Waving hands');
    } else {
      print('Humming to self');
    }
  }
}
{% endprettify %}

For more information, see the article [Mixins in
Dart.](/articles/mixins/)


### Class variables and methods {#class-variables-and-methods}
{:.no_toc}

Use the `static` keyword to implement class-wide variables and methods.

#### Static variables {#static-variables}
{:.no_toc}

Static variables (class variables) are useful for class-wide state and
constants:

<!-- ch02/color.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Color {
  static const red = const Color('red'); // A constant static variable.
  final String name;                     // An instance variable.
  const Color(this.name);                // A constant constructor.
}

main() {
  assert(Color.red.name == 'red');
}
{% endprettify %}

Static variables aren’t initialized until they’re used.

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
This chapter follows the [style guide
recommendation](/articles/style-guide/#prefer-using-lowercamelcase-for-constant-names)
of preferring `lowerCamelCase` for constant names.
</aside>

#### Static methods {#static-methods}
{:.no_toc}

Static methods (class methods) do not operate on an instance, and thus
do not have access to `this`. For example:

<!-- ch02/point.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
import 'dart:math';

class Point {
  num x;
  num y;
  Point(this.x, this.y);

  static num distanceBetween(Point a, Point b) {
    var dx = a.x - b.x;
    var dy = a.y - b.y;
    return sqrt(dx * dx + dy * dy);
  }
}

main() {
  var a = new Point(2, 2);
  var b = new Point(4, 4);
  var distance = Point.distanceBetween(a, b);
  assert(distance < 2.9 && distance > 2.8);
}
{% endprettify %}

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
Consider using top-level functions, instead of static methods, for
common or widely used utilities and functionality.
</aside>

You can use static methods as compile-time constants. For example, you
can pass a static method as a parameter to a constant constructor.


## Generics {#generics}

If you look at the API documentation for the basic array type,
[List,](http://api.dartlang.org/dart_core/List.html) you’ll see that the
type is actually `List<E>`. The \<...\> notation marks List as a
*generic* (or *parameterized*) type—a type that has formal type
parameters. By convention, type variables have single-letter names, such
as E, T, S, K, and V.


### Why use generics? {#why-use-generics}
{:.no_toc}

Because types are optional in Dart, you never *have* to use generics.
You might *want* to, though, for the same reason you might want to use
other types in your code: types (generic or not) let you document and
annotate your code, making your intent clearer.

For example, if you intend for a list to contain only strings, you can
declare it as `List<String>` (read that as “list of string”). That way
you, your fellow programmers, and your tools (such as Dart Editor and
the Dart VM in checked mode) can detect that assigning a non-string to
the list is probably a mistake. Here’s an example:

<!-- ch02/generics.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var names = new List<String>();
names.addAll(['Seth', 'Kathy', 'Lars']);
// ...
names.add(42); // Fails in checked mode (succeeds in production mode).
{% endprettify %}

Another reason for using generics is to reduce code duplication.
Generics let you share a single interface and implementation between
many types, while still taking advantage of checked mode and static
analysis early warnings. For example, say you create an interface for
caching an object:

<!-- ch02/generics.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
abstract class ObjectCache {
  Object getByKey(String key);
  setByKey(String key, Object value);
}
{% endprettify %}

You discover that you want a string-specific version of this interface,
so you create another interface:

<!-- ch02/generics.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
abstract class StringCache {
  String getByKey(String key);
  setByKey(String key, String value);
}
{% endprettify %}

Later, you decide you want a number-specific version of this
interface... You get the idea.

Generic types can save you the trouble of creating all these interfaces.
Instead, you can create a single interface that takes a type parameter:

<!-- ch02/generics.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
abstract class Cache<T> {
  T getByKey(String key);
  setByKey(String key, T value);
}
{% endprettify %}

In this code, T is the stand-in type. It’s a placeholder that you can
think of as a type that a developer will define later.


### Using collection literals {#using-collection-literals}
{:.no_toc}

List and map literals can be parameterized. Parameterized literals are
just like the literals you’ve already seen, except that you add
<code>&lt;<em>type</em>></code> (for lists) or
<code>&lt;<em>keyType</em>, <em>valueType</em>></code> (for maps)
before the opening bracket. You might use
parameterized literals when you want type warnings in checked mode. Here
is example of using typed literals:

<!-- ch02/generics.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var names = <String>['Seth', 'Kathy', 'Lars'];
var pages = <String, String>{
  'index.html': 'Homepage',
  'robots.txt': 'Hints for web robots',
  'humans.txt': 'We are people, not machines'
};
{% endprettify %}


### Using parameterized types with constructors {#using-parameterized-types-with-constructors}
{:.no_toc}

To specify one or more types when using a constructor, put the types in
angle brackets (`<...>`) just after the class name. For example:

<!-- ch02/generics.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var names = new List<String>();
names.addAll(['Seth', 'Kathy', 'Lars']);
var nameSet = new Set<String>.from(names);
{% endprettify %}

The following code creates a map that has integer keys and values of
type View:

<!-- ch02/generics.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var views = new Map<int, View>();
{% endprettify %}


### Generic collections and the types they contain {#generic-collections-and-the-types-they-contain}
{:.no_toc}

Dart generic types are *reified*, which means that they carry their type
information around at runtime. For example, you can test the type of a
collection, even in production mode:

<!-- ch02/generics.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
var names = new List<String>();
names.addAll(['Seth', 'Kathy', 'Lars']);
print(names is List<String>); // true
{% endprettify %}

However, the `is` expression checks the type of the *collection*
only—not of the objects inside it. In production mode, a `List<String>`
might have some non-string items in it. The solution is to either check
each item’s type or wrap item-manipulation code in an exception handler
(see [Exceptions](#exceptions)).

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
In contrast, generics in Java use *erasure*, which means that generic
type parameters are removed at runtime. In Java, you can test whether
an object is a List, but you can’t test whether it’s a `List<String>`.
</aside>

For more information about generics, see [Optional Types in
Dart.](/articles/optional-types/)


## Libraries and visibility {#libraries-and-visibility}

The `import`, `part`, and `library` directives can help you create a
modular and shareable code base. Libraries not only provide APIs, but
are a unit of privacy: identifiers that start with an underscore (\_)
are visible only inside the library. *Every Dart app is a library*, even
if it doesn’t use a library directive.

Libraries can be distributed using packages. See
[Pub Package and Asset Manager](/tools/pub/)
for information about
pub, a package manager included in the SDK.


### Using libraries {#using-libraries}
{:.no_toc}

Use `import` to specify how a namespace from one library is used in the
scope of another library.

For example, Dart web apps generally use the
[dart:html](http://api.dartlang.org/html.html) library, which they can
import like this:

<!-- ch02/libraries/using_libraries.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
import 'dart:html';
{% endprettify %}

The only required argument to `import` is a URI specifying the
library.
For built-in libraries, the URI has the special `dart:` scheme.
For other libraries, you can use a file system path or the `package:`
scheme. The `package:` scheme specifies libraries provided by a package
manager such as the pub tool. For example:

<!-- ch02/libraries/using_schemes.dart, mylib, utils -->
{% prettify dart %}
import 'dart:io';
import 'package:mylib/mylib.dart';
import 'package:utils/utils.dart';
{% endprettify %}

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
*URI* stands for uniform resource identifier.
*URLs* (uniform resource locators) are a common kind of URI.
</aside>


#### Specifying a library prefix {#specifying-a-library-prefix}
{:.no_toc}

If you import two libraries that have conflicting identifiers, then you
can specify a prefix for one or both libraries. For example, if library1
and library2 both have an Element class, then you might have code like
this:

<!-- ch02/libraries/library_prefix.dart, lib1, lib2 -->
{% prettify dart %}
import 'package:lib1/lib1.dart';
import 'package:lib2/lib2.dart' as lib2;
// ...
var element1 = new Element();      // Uses Element from lib1.
var element2 = new lib2.Element(); // Uses Element from lib2.
{% endprettify %}

#### Importing only part of a library {#importing-only-part-of-a-library}
{:.no_toc}

If you want to use only part of a library, you can selectively import
the library. For example:

<!-- ch02/libraries/library_partil.dart, lib1, lib2 -->
{% prettify dart %}
import 'package:lib1/lib1.dart' show foo; // Import only foo.
import 'package:lib2/lib2.dart' hide foo; // Import all names EXCEPT foo.
{% endprettify %}


### Implementing libraries {#implementing-libraries}
{:.no_toc}

Use `library` to name a library, and `part` to specify additional files
in the library.

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
You don’t have to use `library` in an app (a file that has a top-level
main() function), but doing so lets you implement the app in multiple
files.
</aside>

#### Declaring a library {#declaring-a-library}
{:.no_toc}

Use <code>library <em>identifier</em></code>
to specify the name of the current library:

<!-- ch02/ballgame.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
library ballgame;   // Declare that this is a library named ballgame.

import 'dart:html'; // This app uses the HTML library.
// ...Code goes here...
{% endprettify %}

#### Associating a file with a library {#associating-a-file-with-a-library}
{:.no_toc}

To add an implementation file, put
<code>part <em>fileUri</em></code>
in the file that has the `library` statement, where *fileUri*
is the path to the implementation file. Then in the implementation file, put
<code>part of <em>identifier</em></code>,
where *identifier* is the name of the library. The following
example uses `part` and `part of` to implement a library in three files.

The first file, `ballgame.dart`, declares the ballgame library, imports
other libraries it needs, and specifies that `ball.dart` and `util.dart`
are parts of this library:

<!-- ch02/ballgame.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
library ballgame;

import 'dart:html';
// ...Other imports go here...

part 'ball.dart';
part 'util.dart';

// ...Code might go here...
{% endprettify %}

The second file, `ball.dart`, implements part of the ballgame library:

<!-- ch02/ball.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
part of ballgame;

// ...Code goes here...
{% endprettify %}

The third file, `util.dart`, implements the rest of the ballgame
library:

<!-- ch02/util.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
part of ballgame;

// ...Code goes here...
{% endprettify %}

#### Re-exporting libraries {#re-exporting-libraries}
{:.no_toc}

You can combine or repackage libraries by re-exporting part or all of
them. For example, you might have a huge library that you implement as a
set of smaller libraries. Or you might create a library that provides a
subset of methods from another library.

<!-- ch02/french.dart, togo.dart, french_togo.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
// In french.dart:
library french;

hello() => print('Bonjour!');
goodbye() => print('Au Revoir!');

// In togo.dart:
library togo;
import 'french.dart';
export 'french.dart' show hello;

// In another .dart file:
import 'togo.dart';

void main() {
  hello();   //print bonjour
  goodbye(); //FAIL
}
{% endprettify %}


## Isolates {#isolates}

Modern web browsers, even on mobile platforms, run on multi-core CPUs.
To take advantage of all those cores, developers traditionally use
shared-memory threads running concurrently. However, shared-state
concurrency is error prone and can lead to complicated code.

Instead of threads, all Dart code runs inside of *isolates*. Each
isolate has its own memory heap, ensuring that no isolate’s state is
accessible from any other isolate.


## Typedefs {#typedefs}

In Dart, functions are objects, just like strings and numbers are
objects. A *typedef*, or *function-type alias*, gives a function type a
name that you can use when declaring fields and return types. A typedef
retains type information when a function type is assigned to a variable.

Consider the following code, which does not use a typedef:

<!-- ch02/sorted_collection.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class SortedCollection {
  Function compare;

  SortedCollection(int f(Object a, Object b)) {
    compare = f;
  }
}

int sort(Object a, Object b) => ... ; // Initial, broken implementation.

main() {
  SortedCollection collection = new SortedCollection(sort);

  // All we know is that compare is a function, but what type of function?
  assert(collection.compare is Function);
}
{% endprettify %}

Type information is lost when assigning `f` to `compare`. The type of
`f` is `(Object, ``Object)` → `int` (where → means returns), yet the
type of `compare` is Function. If we change the code to use explicit
names and retain type information, both developers and tools can use
that information.

<!-- ch02/sorted_collection.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
typedef int Compare(Object a, Object b);

class SortedCollection {
  Compare compare;

  SortedCollection(this.compare);
}

int sort(Object a, Object b) => ... ; // Initial, broken implementation.

main() {
  SortedCollection collection = new SortedCollection(sort);
  assert(collection.compare is Function);
  assert(collection.compare is Compare);
}
{% endprettify %}

<aside class="alert alert-info" markdown="1">
**Note:**
Currently, typedefs are restricted to function types. We expect this
to change.
</aside>

Because typedefs are simply aliases, they offer a way to check the type
of any function. For example:

<!-- ch02/sorted_collection.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
typedef int Compare(int a, int b);

int sort(int a, int b) => a - b;

main() {
  assert(sort is Compare); // True!
}
{% endprettify %}


## Metadata {#metadata}

Use metadata to give additional information about your code. A metadata
annotation begins with the character `@`, followed by either a reference
to a compile-time constant (such as `deprecated`) or a call to a
constant constructor.

Three annotations are available to all Dart code: `@deprecated`,
`@override`, and `@proxy`. For examples of using `@override` and
`@proxy`, see [Extending a class](#extending-a-class).
Here’s an example of using the `@deprecated`
annotation:

<!-- ch02/ch02_meta/bin/ch02_meta.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
class Television {
  /// _Deprecated: Use [turnOn] instead._
  @deprecated      // Metadata; makes Dart Editor warn about using activate().
  void activate() {
    turnOn();
  }

  /// Turns the TV's power on.
  void turnOn() {
    print('on!');
  }
}
{% endprettify %}

You can define your own metadata annotations. Here’s an example of
defining a @todo annotation that takes two arguments:

<!-- ch02/ch02_meta_create/todo.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
library todo;

class todo {
  final String who;
  final String what;

  const todo(this.who, this.what);
}
{% endprettify %}

And here’s an example of using that @todo annotation:

<!-- ch02/ch02_meta_create/metadata_user.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
import 'todo.dart';

@todo('seth', 'make this do something')
void doSomething() {
  print('do something');
}
{% endprettify %}

Metadata can appear before a library, class, typedef, type parameter,
constructor, factory, function, field, parameter, or variable
declaration and before an import or export directive. You can
retrieve metadata at runtime using reflection.


## Comments {#comments}

Dart supports single-line comments, multi-line comments, and
documentation comments.


### Single-line comments {#single-line-comments}
{:.no_toc}

A single-line comment begins with `//`. Everything between `//` and the
end of line is ignored by the Dart compiler.

<!-- ch02/single_line_comments.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
main() {
  // TODO: refactor into an AbstractLlamaGreetingFactory?
  print('Welcome to my Llama farm!');
}
{% endprettify %}


### Multi-line comments {#multi-line-comments}
{:.no_toc}

A multi-line comment begins with `/*` and ends with `*/`. Everything
between `/*` and `*/` is ignored by the Dart compiler (unless the
comment is a documentation comment; see the next section). Multi-line
comments can nest.

<!-- ch02/multi_line_comments.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
main() {
  /*
   * This is a lot of work. Consider raising chickens.

  Llama larry = new Llama();
  larry.feed();
  larry.exercise();
  larry.clean();
   */
}
{% endprettify %}


### Documentation comments {#documentation-comments}
{:.no_toc}

Documentation comments are multi-line or single-line comments that begin
with `///` or `/**`. Using `///` on consecutive lines has the same
effect as a multi-line doc comment.

Inside a documentation comment, the Dart compiler ignores all text
unless it is enclosed in brackets. Using brackets, you can refer to
classes, methods, fields, top-level variables, functions, and
parameters. The names in brackets are resolved in the lexical scope of
the documented program element.

Here is an example of documentation comments with references to other
classes and arguments:

<!-- ch02/doc_comments.dart -->
{% prettify dart %}
/// A domesticated South American camelid (Lama glama).
///
/// Andean cultures have used llamas as meat and pack animals
/// since pre-Hispanic times.
class Llama {
  String name;

  /// Feeds your llama [Food].
  ///
  /// The typical llama eats one bale of hay per week.
  void feed(Food food) {
    // ...
  }

  /// Exercises your llama with an [activity] for
  /// [timeLimit] minutes.
  void exercise(Activity activity, int timeLimit) {
    // ...
  }
}
{% endprettify %}

In the generated documentation, `[Food]` becomes a link to the API docs
for the Food class.

To parse Dart code and generate HTML documentation, you can use the
SDK’s [documentation generation
tool.](/tools/docgen/) For an example of
generated documentation, see the [Dart API
documentation.](http://api.dartlang.org) For advice on how to structure
your comments, see [Guidelines for Dart Doc
Comments.](/articles/doc-comment-guidelines/)


## Summary {#summary}

This chapter summarized the commonly used features in the Dart language.
More features are being implemented, but we expect that they won’t break
existing code. For more information, see the [Dart Language
Specification](/docs/spec/) and
[articles](/articles/) such as [Idiomatic
Dart.](/articles/idiomatic-dart/)


<hr>
{% include book-nav.html %}
