---
layout: book
title: "Tools"
subsite: "Dart Up and Running"
description: "Read Chapter 4. Tools of Dart: Up and Running, published by O'Reilly."
prev-chapter: ch03.html
prev-chapter-title: "Library Tour"
next-chapter: ch05.html
next-chapter-title: "Walkthrough"
---

{% include toc.html %}
{% include book-nav.html %}

# {{ page.title }}

Dart provides several tools to help you write and deploy your web and
command-line apps. These tools include:

[pub: The Dart package and asset manager](#pub-the-dart-package-and-asset-manager)

:   Download and install packages of libraries,
    prepare your app for deployment, and more.

[Dart Editor](#dart-editor)

:   Edit, run, and debug web and command-line apps.

[Dartium: Chromium with the Dart VM](#dartium-chromium-with-the-dart-vm)

:   Run Dart web apps. This is a special build of Chromium (the project
    behind Google Chrome).

[dart2js: The Dart-to-JavaScript compiler](#dart2js-the-dart-to-javascript-compiler)

:   Convert your web app to JavaScript, so it can run in non-Dartium
    browsers.

[dart: The standalone Dart VM](#dart-the-standalone-vm)

:   Run your command-line apps—server-side scripts, programs, servers,
    and any other apps that don’t run in a browser.

[dartanalyzer: The static analyzer](#dartanalyzer-the-static-analyzer)

:   Analyze your Dart source from the command line.

All of these tools are in the Dart Editor bundle, since the editor uses
them. You can also download Dartium separately, and you can download an
SDK that includes pub, dart2js, dart, dartanalyzer, and more. See the
[Tools page](/tools/) for links and details.

The tools are in the `dart-sdk/bin` directory of your Dart installation
directory. If you intend to use tools such as pub, dart2js, and dart
from the command line, add the `bin` directory to your path.


## pub: The Dart Package and Asset Manager

The documentation for pub has moved to
[dartlang.org/tools/pub/](/tools/pub/).


## Dart Editor

The documentation for Dart Editor has moved to
[dartlang.org/tools/editor/](/tools/editor/).

## Dartium: Chromium with the Dart VM

The documentation for Dartium has moved to
[dartlang.org/tools/dartium/](/tools/dartium/).

## dart2js: The Dart-to-JavaScript Compiler

The documentation for dart2js has moved to
[dartlang.org/tools/dart2js/](/tools/dart2js/).


## dart: The Standalone VM

The documentation for dart has moved to
[dartlang.org/tools/dart-vm/](/tools/dart-vm/).


## dartanalyzer: The Static Analyzer

The documentation for dartanalyzer has moved to
[dartlang.org/tools/analyzer/](/tools/analyzer/).

## Summary

This chapter covered the most commonly used Dart tools. All of them are
available in the Dart Editor download, but you can also download Dartium
or the SDK separately.


<hr>
{% include book-nav.html %}
