---
title: Dart VM and dart2js Performance
layout: default
description: Tracking Dart performance across the Dart VM and dart2js.
js:
- url: /js/performance-charts.js
  defer: true
---

<style>
/* https://code.google.com/p/dart/issues/detail?id=10602 */

#performance-charts > .tab-pane {
  display: block !important;
  height: 0;
  overflow: hidden;
}
#performance-charts > .tab-pane.active {
    height: 440px;
}
</style>

# {{ page.title }}

Tracking [Dart VM](/tools/dart-vm/) and
[dart2js](/tools/dart2js/) performance. 

<ul class="nav nav-tabs" id="performance-charts-nav-base">
</ul>

<div class="tab-content" id="performance-charts-base" style='height: 445px'>
</div>

*To navigate the chart, drag to pan and shift-drag to zoom.*

(See also: [Dart I/O Performance](/performance/io/))

<section id="performance-faq" markdown="1">

Benchmark descriptions
: We are currently showing charts for the
  [Octane](https://developers.google.com/octane/)-inspired benchmarks
  DeltaBlue, Richards, Tracer, and FluidMotion. These benchmarks
  are tracked as part of the [ton80](https://github.com/dart-lang/ton80)
  benchmarking suite, which contains both the Dart code and the JavaScript
  code used in these tests.

  * [DeltaBlue](https://github.com/dart-lang/ton80/tree/master/lib/src/DeltaBlue)
  is a one-way constraint solver, originally written in Smalltalk by
  John Maloney and Mario Wolczko. The main focus in DeltaBlue is on
  polymorphism and object-oriented programming.

  * [FluidMotion](https://github.com/dart-lang/ton80/tree/master/lib/src/FluidMotion)
  is a 2D Navier-Stokes equations solver, originally written in
  JavaScript by Oliver Hunt.
  The main focus is on accessing numeric arrays,
  as well as doing floating-point arithmetic.

  * [Havlak](https://github.com/dart-lang/ton80/tree/master/lib/src/Havlak)
  is a loop recognition algorithm benchmark originally published at the
  [Scala Days 2011 Workshop at Stanford](
  https://code.google.com/p/multi-language-bench/source/browse/trunk/doc/scaladays2011-paper/main.pdf).
  The Havlak algorithm is an extension of Tarjan's interval-finding
  algorithm that deals with irreducible graphs, and constructs a
  loop-nesting forest for an arbitrary flow graph.

  * [Richards](https://github.com/dart-lang/ton80/tree/master/lib/src/Richards)
  is an OS kernel simulation benchmark, originally written
  in BCPL by Martin Richards. The main focus in Richards is on property
  access and calling functions and methods.

  * [Tracer](https://github.com/dart-lang/ton80/tree/master/lib/src/Tracer)
  is a ray tracer benchmark,
  originally written in JavaScript by Adam Burmister.
  Both Adam’s and the Octane version in JavaScript use
  the class emulation pattern from the prototype.js library.
  Because Dart has a native class system,
  it's unfair to do a direct performance comparison with the Octane version.
  We therefore compare Dart performance with
  an improved JavaScript version called Tracer.
  The improved version uses only constructors and prototypes
  without any abstraction layers in between;
  it runs 50% faster than the original
  Raytrace JavaScript benchmark in Octane.


Benchmark score meaning
: The score is essentially runs/second: the number of times
  you can run the benchmark in one second. For all scores,
  bigger is better.



Benchmark harness
: The Dart VM numbers are generated using the Dart
  [benchmark harness](https://github.com/dart-lang/benchmark_harness) on the
  Dart VM. Similarly, the dart2js numbers are generated by compiling the
  benchmarks and harness to JavaScript
  and then running the generated code in V8.
  Finally, the V8 numbers are generated using the same benchmarks written in
  JavaScript and with exactly the same harness rewritten in JavaScript.



System setup
: The benchmarks are run on an Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-2400 CPU @ 3.10GHz
  processor running the Ubuntu 12.04 LTS x64 operating system.
  While the code runs on a 64-bit operating system, we’re
  running the 32-bit version the V8 and Dart VMs.



Is it fair to use typed versions of the benchmarks for Dart? Shouldn't they be untyped to make the comparison with JavaScript fair? 
: Yes, it is fair. Type annotations in Dart have &mdash; by design &mdash;
  no impact on
  runtime performance in the VM's default mode (production). For more details,
  read more about Dart's
  [optional static types](/articles/optional-types/) and
  [why they are optional](/articles/why-dart-types/).
  _Credit to [olliej on HN](http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=4903435)._


Where can I learn more about benchmarking Dart?
: Read more about [benchmarking Dart](/articles/benchmarking/).


Will there be more benchmarks?
: Yes. Porting benchmarks correctly takes time. As more benchmarks become ready,
  we will publish more charts.



</section>
